Estimating fine age structure and time trends in human contact patterns from coarse contact data: the Bayesian rate consistency model
Since the emergence of severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2), many contact surveys have been conducted to measure changes in human interactions in the face of the pandemic and non-pharmaceutical interventions. These surveys were typically conducted longitudinally, using protocols that differ from those used in the pre-pandemic era. We present a model-based statistical approach that can reconstruct contact patterns at 1-year resolution even when the age of the contacts is reported coarsely by 5 or 10-year age bands. This innovation is rooted in population-level consistency constraints in how contacts between groups must add up, which prompts us to call the approach presented here the Bayesian rate consistency model. The model incorporates computationally efficient Hilbert Space Gaussian process priors to infer the dynamics in age- and gender-structured social contacts and is designed to adjust for reporting fatigue in longitudinal surveys. We demonstrate on simulations the ability to reconstruct contact patterns by gender and 1-year age interval from coarse data with adequate accuracy and within a fully Bayesian framework to quantify uncertainty. We investigate the patterns of social contact data collected in Germany from April to June 2020 across five longitudinal survey waves. We reconstruct the fine age structure in social contacts during the early stages of the pandemic and demonstrate that social contacts rebounded in a structured, non-homogeneous manner. We also show that by July 2020, social contact intensities remained well below pre-pandemic values despite a considerable easing of non-pharmaceutical interventions. This model-based inference approach is open access, computationally tractable enabling full Bayesian uncertainty quantification, and readily applicable to contemporary survey data as long as the exact age of survey participants is reported.